{:title "Prisoner’s Dilemma, part 1"
 :layout :post
 :tags ["clojurescript" "tdd" "Rich Hickey" "reagent" "phantomjs" "prisoner’s dilemma"]}

### Description of the prisoner’s dilemma

The prisoner’s dilemma is a well-known game-theory problem in which two
prisoners are separately interrogated and each must decide whether to
rat the other out (defect) or keep mum (cooperate). The prosecutor can
only get a six-month sentence without a confession. So the best thing
for both prisoners as a collective is for both to cooperate. If one
prisoner defects and the other cooperates, the cooperator goes free and
the defector gets 10 years. If both prisoners defect, each gets six
years.

Think through the problem: whatever the other person does, your best
strategy is to defect. If she cooperates you go free. If she defects,
you get a shorter sentence. What is best for you is worst for the
collective. Thus, the so-called Nash equilibrium is for both prisoners
to defect. This condition holds so long as the “temptation” payoff (you
defect, they cooperate) is better than the “reward” payoff (both
cooperate) is better than the “punishment” payoff (both defect) is
better than the “sucker” payoff (you cooperate, they defect).

There are a variety of real-world examples of the prisoner’s dilemma.
Doping in professional sports is one.

An iterated prisoner’s dilemma involves multiple rounds. In that
situation, optimal strategies involve cooperation. There have been
contests held in which teams created a strategy which then competes
against other strategies. I decided to implement the prisoner’s dilemma
in ClojureScript to practice ClojureScript, Test Driven Development, and
Reagent.

### Setup

First order of business is to set up a project:

    ~/prisoner> lein new reagent prisoner +test

The `+test` argument adds support for the `doo` lein plugin that
supports testing. Once everything installs, we can do

    ~/prisoner> lein figwheel

to launch the hello world app to `localhost:3449`.

To enable the tests to automatically update and print to the console, we
must add `(enable-console-print!)` to the
`/prisoner/src/cljs/prisoner/core.cljs` file.

We can also run

    ~/prisoner> lein doo phantom test

### Design

In an object-oriented language, we would probably use an interface, with
each player maintaining state. The functional approach is to pass state
into pure functions representing each strategy. We will maintain an atom
called `results` with a vector of vectors representing the games so far.
We will also pass in a `player-num`: `:player1` or `:player2` to the
functions representing the players. The object-oriented approach, by
using an interface, would enforce how players are implemented, which is
helpful. We could use a record type for each strategy and define a
protocol with a `play-round` method. But then each player would hold a
reference to the `results` atom and would contain the stateful
`player-num`. That, as I understand it, is the kind of “complecting”
Rich Hickey [warns](http://www.infoq.com/presentations/Simple-Made-Easy)
about.

Let’s do the player implementation in
`/prisoner/src/cljs/prisoner/player.cljs` and add the accompanying tests
in `/prisoner/test/cljs/prisoner/player_test.cljs`. We also need to
update the test runner: `doo_runner.cljs` should now `require` the new
namespace and invoke its tests.

### Coding

We start by defining these tests:

    (deftest all-cooperate-always-cooperates
      (is (= :cooperate (sut/all-cooperate [] :player1)))
      (is (= :cooperate (sut/all-cooperate [[:cooperate :defect]])))
      (is (= :cooperate (sut/all-cooperate [[:defect :cooperate]]))))

They fail because the function is not found. Now we implement
`all-cooperate`:

    (defn all-cooperate [_ __]
      :cooperate)

And so we shall proceed with the remaining
[strategies](http://prisoners-dilemma.com/strategies.html) in a future
episode.
