{:title "Prisoner’s Dilemma, part 2" 
 :layout :post 
 :tags ["clojurescript" "tdd" "map" "reduce" "prisoner’s dilemma"]}

### Adding the remaining players

I added the tests and implementations of several more strategies,
refactoring game results into their own variables. For example,

    (def five-rounds-against-all-c [[:cooperate :cooperate]
                                    [:defect :cooperate]
                                    [:cooperate :cooperate]
                                    [:defect :cooperate]
                                    [:cooperate :cooperate]])
                                   

Then, for example, I defined the test

    (deftest tit-for-tat-works
      (is (= :cooperate (sut/tit-for-tat empty-results :player1)))
      (is (= :cooperate (sut/tit-for-tat one-round-all-c :player1)))
      (is (= :defect (sut/tit-for-tat one-round-all-d :player1)))
      (is (= :cooperate (sut/tit-for-tat five-rounds-against-all-c :player1)))
      (is (= :defect (sut/tit-for-tat five-rounds-against-all-d :player1))))

And implemented it as follows:

    (defn get-prev-move-helper [results player-num]
      "Given the results and the player-num, returns a map with the keys :me and
      :them with each key mapped to the function first or last, where that function
      is appropriate to retrieving the player or opponent's move from a vector
      representing a game. Throws an error if player-num is invalid, returns nil
      if results is empty."
      (if (= 0 (count results))
        nil
        (if (= :player1 player-num)
          {:me first :them last}
          (if (= :player2 player-num)
            {:me last :them first}
            (throw Exception. "Invalid player number")))))

    (defn get-their-prev-move [results player-num]
      "Given a vector of vectors of results and the player number :player1 or
      :player2, returns the opposite player’s previous move. If the results vector
      is empty, returns nil."
      ((:them (get-prev-move-helper results player-num)) (last results)))

    (defn tit-for-tat [results player-num]
      "Opens with cooperate, plays opponent's previous move thereafter."
      (if (= 0 (count results))
        :cooperate
        (get-their-prev-move results player-num)))
        

You can see the rest of the implementation on [GitHub](https://github.com/Ethan826/prisoners-dilemma).

### Implementing the game

Now it’s time to add the functions that actually run the game. We put
them in the namespace `prisoner.game` and create the corresponding
`prisoner.game_test`.

The concept is that we’ll have a function to run a single game, a
function to run a series of games by calling the first function, and a
function to tally the score. I also realized it is not necessary to
maintain any state through an atom, as we shall see. Seems I took too
long a break from FP.

#### `run-game`

First, some tests (`p` is the player namespace):

    (testing "run-game"
      (deftest run-game-works-with-empty
        (is (=
            [[:cooperate :cooperate]]
            (sut/run-game p/all-cooperate p/all-cooperate []))))
      (deftest run-game-works-with-results
        (is (=
            [[:cooperate :cooperate]
              [:cooperate :cooperate]]
            (sut/run-game p/all-cooperate p/all-cooperate [[:cooperate :cooperate]])))))

It may be bad form to use the `all-cooperate` function here. I’m not
clear on the right TDD approach.

Now, to get the tests to pass:

    (defn run-game [p1 p2 results]
      (conj results [(p1 results :player1) (p2 results :player2)]))

#### `run-series`

First some tests:

    (testing "run-series"
      (deftest can-run-two-games
        (is (=
            (sut/run-series p/all-cooperate p/all-cooperate 2)
            [[:cooperate :cooperate]
              [:cooperate :cooperate]])))
      (deftest can-run-many-games
        (is (= 500 (count (sut/run-series p/random p/all-cooperate 500))))))
        

And then the code:

    (defn run-series [p1 p2 rounds]
      (let [results []]
        (loop [results results
              rounds rounds]
          (if (= 0 rounds)
            results
            (recur (run-game p1 p2 results) (dec rounds))))))

One thing to note: I had to futz with the code to get the `recur` into
[tail position](http://stackoverflow.com/questions/310974/what-is-tail-call-optimization).
Being in tail position means that the call to `recur` happens at the
same place that would return a value. Here, if we replaced the recur
statement with `"foo"`, the function would return `"foo"`. That’s how we
know we got it into tail position.

### `score-game`

A quick test to make sure `score-game` works. We’ll test it more
extensively in `get-score`. First, let’s define the payoffs in the
`prisoner.game` namespace:

    (def temptation 0)
    (def reward 0.5)
    (def punishment 6)
    (def sucker 10)

And now, the test:

    (deftest score-game-works
      (is (= (sut/score-game [:defect :cooperate]) [sut/temptation sut/sucker])))

The implementation:

    (defn score-game [result]
      (case result
        [:cooperate :cooperate] [reward reward]
        [:cooperate :defect] [sucker temptation]
        [:defect :cooperate] [temptation sucker]
        [:defect :defect] [punishment punishment]))

It’s a simple case statement to handle each of the four results in a
round.

#### `get-score`

Last order of business is to take the vector of results and produce a
final score in the format `(105 73)`.

    (testing "get-score"
      (deftest get-score-empty
        (is (= (sut/get-score []) [0 0])))
      (deftest get-score-one-round
        (is (= (sut/get-score [[:cooperate :defect]]) [sut/sucker sut/temptation]))
        (is (= (sut/get-score [[:cooperate :cooperate]]) [sut/reward sut/reward]))
        (is (= (sut/get-score [[:defect :cooperate]]) [sut/temptation sut/sucker]))
        (is (= (sut/get-score [[:defect :defect]]) [sut/punishment sut/punishment])))
      (deftest get-score-multiple-rounds
        (is (= (sut/get-score
                (sut/run-series p/all-cooperate p/all-cooperate 50))
              [(* 50 sut/reward) (* 50 sut/reward)]))))

Here we check that we get the right result with an empty vector, that we
get the right results with each game permutation, and that we do a
representatively large game.

Now for the implementation. This is why I like FP:

    (defn get-score [results]
      (reduce #(map + (score-game %2) %) [0 0] results))
      

The `reduce` function (which is similar to the `fold` function in ML
languages) takes a function, an optional accumulator, and a collection.
The function gets called with each element of the collection from right
to left. In the function’s scope, the accumulator is bound to the first
argument and the element is bound to the second argument. The return
value of that function is then bound to the accumulator, and the
function is called with the next element of the collection.

For example,

    (reduce (fn [accum el] (cons el accum)) [] [1 2 3])

starts with `3`, which it binds to `el`, and `[]` which it binds to
`accum`. The function body runs `(cons 3 [])`, which evaluates to `(3)`,
which it binds to `accum` and exits. We are now in the same situation as
if we had called

    (reduce (fn [accum el] (cons el accum)) (3) [1 2])

Finally, we get the result `(3 2 1)`.

The shorthand for a lambda function in Clojure is `#()`, where `%` or
`%1` is bound to the first element, `%2` to the second, and so on. Thus
we could have written

    (reduce #(cons %2 %) [] [1 2 3])

The `get-score` method works similarly, accumulating the score in the
accumulator. The last detail is that `map` can be called with a function
and any number collections, and it calls the function with as many
arguments as there are collections, until the shortest collection is
tapped out.

    (map + coll1 coll2 coll3)

In pseudocode, that returns

    (coll1[0] + coll2[0] + coll3[0], coll1[1] + coll2[1] + coll3[1], ... coll1[n] + coll2[n] + coll3[n])

where

    n = min(length(coll1), length(coll2), length(coll3)) - 1

So there we have it, the logic works. In the next episode we’ll code up
the front end.
