{:title "Diet Tracker App, part 2"
:layout :post
:tags ["angular2" "typescript" "dependency injection" "express" "node" "diet tracker" "canactivate"]}

I have been a bit busy with job applications and a coding challenge
(more soon on that). In the meantime, it escaped my attention that
something was profoundly out-of-whack with the routing on my
diet-tracker app.

Problems with CanActivate
-------------------------

There seem to still be some kinks in CanActivate, a decorator that
determines whether a user can access a component. The problem is in
assuring that CanActivate knows what’s going on when it’s called into
action. For two different (consternation-inducing) reasons, it did not.

### Dependency injection

First, my code relied on the results of a `checkAuth` method of my
`login.service`. Unfortunately, non-components like `CanActivate` for
some reason are not treated the same way as components for dependency
injection purposes. Thus, it is necessary to create a singleton
dependency injector and use it to inject services that `CanActivate`
relies on. I got the idea
[here](https://github.com/angular/angular/issues/4112), and implemented
it thus:

    import {Injector} from "angular2/core";
    
    let appInjectorRef: Injector;
    
    export const appInjector = (injector?: Injector): Injector => {
      if (injector) { appInjectorRef = injector; };
      
      return appInjectorRef;
    };

### Not aware of updates

When a user logs in, she is entitled to see different pages than before.
But unless `CanActivate` is aware of that change, it carries on blocking
welcome visitors like a bouncer with an out-of-date list of names. My
`login.component` had the following function called by clicking submit
on the login form:

    onSubmit() {
        this.error = null;
        if (this.loginForm.valid) {
          this.accountService.submitLogin(this.username.value, this.password.value)
            .map((res: Response) => res.json())
            .subscribe(
            data => {
              localStorage.setItem("jwt", data.jwt);
              this.accountService.doCheckJWT();
              this.loginService.loginEvent.subscribe(() => {
                this.router.navigate(['DailyForm']);
              });
            },
            error => {
              this.error = error.json().error;
            }
            );
        } else {
          alert("Invalid submission. Correct errors and resubmit.");
        }
    }

Unfortunately, although the `DailyForm` component was aware of the
user’s now-logged-in status, the other access-controlled links are not.
I believe this problem is recognized
[here](https://github.com/angular/angular/issues/2965). I am going to
try to see if I can figure out a way to introduce asynchronous behavior
in `CanActivate` (an event listener or a subscription to an observable).
In the meantime, I used this ghastly hack to force the `CanActivate` to
reload, thereby taking note of the changed state:

    this.loginService.loginEvent.subscribe(() => {
      window.location.href="https://flashbangsplat.com/diet-tracker/diet/daily/";
    });

This is truly grotesque, because it is brittle (the url could change)
and I believe in some circumstances it can screw up the back button /
browsing history. But it works for now while I try to find a more robust
approach.
