{:title "About"
 :layout :page
 :page-index 0
 :navbar? true}

Welcome to my website. I am a software apprentice at a web- and
mobile-development consultancy. As a recovering lawyer who hated his
job, it’s hard to overstate what a difference it makes to wake up in the
morning and look forward to what I get to do at work. Check out my
[blog](https://flashbangsplat.com/blog). Here is my
[GitHub](https://github.com/Ethan826), my
[LinkedIn](https://www.linkedin.com/in/ethan-kent-56b14010), and my
[résumé](https://flashbangsplat.com/public/resume.pdf).

### My work as an apprentice at Table XI

I started as an apprentice at Table XI Partners, LLC, in August. Early
in the apprenticeship I worked on coding exercises and internal
projects. Now I spend most of my time working on client projects
involving legacy projects with tens of thousands of lines of code. It
has been an outstanding experience, and I’ve found the work enjoyable
and challenging. I’m proud of the progress I’ve made.

I have written up the work I’ve done during my apprenticeship in a blog
[post](https://flashbangsplat.com/blog/posts-output/2017-01-22-apprenticeship-1/).

### Projects I did before the apprenticeship

I have been teaching myself programming for the last few years. I ramped
up my focus around Thanksgiving last year, and especially so since
February, when I decided to actively pursue a career change. I have
worked on the following projects:

-   A ClojureScript/Reagent iterative prisoner’s dilemma simulator
    ([app](https://flashbangsplat.com/prisoner/) |
    [code](https://github.com/Ethan826/prisoners-dilemma) |
    [posts](https://flashbangsplat.com/blog/tags-output/prisoner%E2%80%99s%20dilemma/))
-   A full-stack Angular 2 / TypeScript toy diet tracker app 
    [code](https://github.com/Ethan826/diet-tracker) |
    [posts](https://flashbangsplat.com/blog/tags-output/diet%20tracker/))
-   Numerous Udacity projects, including—
    -   A Flask app
        ([code](https://github.com/Ethan826/udacity-catalog))
    -   Expansion and refactoring of a Google App Engine API
        ([code](https://github.com/Ethan826/udacity-conference))
    -   Extensive refactoring of HTML5 canvas-based 2d video game
        ([code](https://github.com/Ethan826/udacity-arcade))
-   Numerous one-off scripts and curiosity projects, including—
    -   A Clojure script to calculate the chances that the Cubs would
        have failed to win the World Series since 1908
        ([code](https://gist.github.com/Ethan826/2261d13d467789f2996e))
    -   A Clojure script to consolidate and filter numerous large
        spreadsheets for a work project, saving several weeks of
        document review
    -   A Python script to rename numerous documents, saving a paralegal
        approximatley 20 hours of work

### About me

#### Early life and piloting

I grew up in Greensboro, NC, and now live in Oak Park, IL, with my wife
and two kids. I wanted to be a pilot from the age of four, so I went to
Embry-Riddle Aeronautical University, where I earned a B.S. in
Aeronautical Science (the degree for aspiring pilots). I eventually
caught on as a flight instructor, first for a large San Diego flight
school, then freelance at the flying club across the street. As my
flight time approached that required by the airlines to apply, I began
to realize that flying is fun but soon becomes rote and does not tap
into strengths that I wanted to use in my career. That, and my wife
(then my girlfriend) pointed out that spending half of every month in
hotel rooms would be a bad fit for being a good dad.

I made a list of strengths I wanted to use and further
develop—analytical skills, written communication, and the ability and
desire to keep learning new things—and decided that law fit the bill. I
studied hard for the LSAT, got a good score, and applied. I was
delighted to be admitted to Harvard Law School, and moved to Boston,
teaching the LSAT during the transition.

#### Legal career

I loved law school. It was hard, and it developed my ability to approach
problems systematically. One of my best
[professors](https://its.law.nyu.edu/facultyprofiles/index.cfm?fuseaction=profile.overview&personid=23845)
said that a lawyer’s principal skill is to recursively break a problem
into smaller pieces until it becomes tractable. In the process, a lawyer
must become a subject-matter expert in some tiny domain at the center of
the case. That was exactly the kind of the intellectual process I enjoy
using and believe to be one of my strengths.

When I graduated, I took a job at a large Chicago-based
[firm](https://jenner.com/). It turns out that practicing law is quite
different from being a law student, at least these days. As has been
extensively
[documented](http://www.theatlantic.com/business/archive/2014/07/the-only-job-with-an-industry-devoted-to-helping-people-quit/375199/),
legal practice is actually pretty miserable. It’s not (or not only) the
work-life balance; it’s the zero-sum nature of commercial litigation and
how that creates the deadweight loss of smart and talented people in
high-rise office towers working long hours merely to nullify one
another’s work. It’s the triviality of the problems (who really cares
which giant corporation eats the losses covered by an ambiguous
indemnification clause). It’s the fearful, risk-averse, elitist, pompous
culture. It’s the joylessness. It’s the [cargo-cult
lawyering](https://twitter.com/mbutterick/status/105336038343450624).
It’s the well-established partner who used to run—*run*—to the managing
partner’s office several times a week. It’s the fact that I used to love
talking and thinking about law, but practicing broke something inside of
me.

#### Technology and programming

I had always been interested in technology. As a Cub Scout, I had a
subscription to *Boy’s Life* magazine. Each issue had a QBasic program
at the back, which I would faithfully type into our MS-DOS computer. In
high school, I took AP Computer Science and (previewing both my
programming and lawyering skills), wrote a TI-83 program that did the
quadratic formula for me in my math class, returning the simplified
roots—an approach that the teacher had not thought to ban. During
college, I watched ZDTV religiously and took particular interest in the
technologies used in airliners. As a flight instructor I wrote my own
website in Notepad. And in law school, I worked on the Journal of Law
and Technology.

As a lawyer, I did as much to pretend I was a programmer as I could. My
work-issued laptop crawled, so I partitioned it and did most of my work
on Ubuntu. (IT eventually activated BitLocker, which broke GRUB, but I
eventually figured out how to put GRUB on a thumb drive.) I created
LaTeX templates for memos and briefs. And on several occasions, I wrote
scripts to automate time-consuming projects. For example, I was asked to
review a set of 29 spreadsheets with over 200,000 rows of data to
identify certain kinds of comments. I wrote a Clojure script to build a
unified spreadsheet, filter against a lengthy regular expression, pull
in all related entries, and highlight the terms that matched. I wrote a
Python script to relabel over a thousand PDF exhibits based on a
spreadsheet correlating the exhibits’ Bates numbers with their exhibit
numbers. I am also a member of my 
[current firm’s](http://www.kelleydrye.com) technology committee.

I became serious about trying to change careers. I contemplated
attending a bootcamp, but between my student loans and my family, it was
not practical. Instead, I began taking Code School, Linda, and Treehouse
courses and reading books and tutorials. I cast a wide net, dabbling in
C, C++, Haskell, OCaml, F\#, and D. I became especially interested in
web languages as well as Clojure. As I became more focused on changing
careers, I enrolled in Udacity and completed their Full-Stack Web
Developer Nanodegree in one month (it’s scheduled as a six-to-nine month
course). Most recently, I built a diet tracker app to learn Angular 2,
Express, and TypeScript, as well as a ClojureScript / React app to
simulate iterated games of the 
[prisoner’s dilemma](https://flashbangsplat.com/prisoner) problem from game theory.

### Flash Bang Splat

Flash Bang Splat comes from [this list](http://blog.codinghorror.com/ascii-pronunciation-rules-for-programmers/)
of slang names for ASCII characters. Flash (\#), Bang (!), Splat (\*)
has a nice ring and tells a short (if ambiguous and possibly woebegone)
story. My logo is by
[silla\_cutie1030](https://www.fiverr.com/silla_cutie1030).
